# RxAction

An RxAction will do some work when executed with an input. While executing, zero or more output values and/or a failure may be generated.

RxActions are useful for performing side-effecting work upon user interaction, like when a button is clicked. Actions can also be automatically disabled based on a property, and this disabled state can be represented in a UI by disabling any controls associated with the action.

## How does it work

An RxAction's constructor takes a mandatory `workFactory` function that takes some input and produces an Observable. It also optionally takes an `enabledIf` Observable (defaults to true if not specified).

When `Execute` is called, the RxAction passes the parameter (if any) to the `workFactory` function and subscribes to the Observable it returns. So it's *creating a new Observable every time the action is executed.*

The Observable returned from the `workFactory` represents some work that needs to be done. The action will subscribe to that Observable and emit next events or errors as needed.

Regardless of the value sent as `enabledIf` the RxAction is disabled while it's being executed. That means you can't execute an action twice at the same time.

Calling the `Execute` method will perform the underlying action.

`ExecuteWithCompletion` is mainly used in tests, it will perform the underlying action *regardless of whether there are any subscriptions to it*. The fact that it's returning an Observable is just there for the convenience, in case we want to be informed of the state of the execution of the action, as it'll emit the elements the action returns and its potential errors.

## Threading and Action Factory

As we want actions to return on the main thread we created a `RxActionFactory` service that simplifies the process of creating an action while passing the appropriate scheduler to it. ViewModels that want to use `RxActions` should include this dependency and call one of its methods to create `UIActions` or `InputActions` as needed.

```c#
StartTimeEntry = rxActionFactory.FromAsync<Suggestion>(suggestion => startTimeEntry(suggestion));
```

There are no methods to create `RxActions` (with input and output) because they are not used for now, but they could be added if needed.

## Public properties

`RxAction` exposes the following properties:

### Elements
`IObservable<TElement> Elements`

This is an observable that forwards the events resulting from the executed operation. No errors will show up here.

### Errors
`IObservable<Exception> Errors`

The errors of the execution, this includes any error generated in the Observable returned by `workFactory` and also any errors occurred in the action itself, which right now can only be `RxActionNotEnabledException`

### Executing
`IObservable<bool> Executing`

Sends `true` when excution starts and `false` when it ends.

### Enabled
`IObservable<bool> Enabled`

Wether or not the action is enabled. This is calculated from the `enabledIf` Observable and if the action is currently being executed.

### Inputs
`ISubject<TInput> Inputs`

This is the Subject that gets the execution started. Every event sent through it starts a new execution of the action (unless the action is already executing). Moreover, the `Execute` method calls `OnNext` on this Subject to start the execution. It's exposed publicly so we can easily bind an RxAction to buttons or other UI elements.

## Code samples

For example, this is an action that takes a string and returns a bool Observable.

```c#
var checkEmailExistAction = new RxAction<String, bool>(email => {
  return myAPI.checkEmail(email);
});
```
or shorter
```c#
var checkEmailExist = new RxAction<String, bool>(myAPI.checkEmail);
```
we would run it like this:
```c#
checkEmailExist.Execute("ricardo@toggl.com");
```
We could also specify an `enabledIf` parameter
```c#
Observable<bool> emailCheckingEnabled = ...
var checkEmailExist = new RxAction<String, bool>(checkEmail, emailCheckingEnabled);
```
If we try to run `checkEmailExist` while the action is disabled, it'll return an error. But we don't need to manually disable it while it's being executed, that gets handled automatically by the action.

Optionally we can subscribe to events generated by the action through the Observable returned by `ExecuteWithCompletion`:
```c#
checkEmailExist.ExecuteWithCompletion("ricardo@toggl.com")
  .Subscribe(
    exists => {
      Console.WriteLine($"Email exist: {exist}");
    },
    error => {
      Console.WriteLine($"Something went wrong: {error}");
    }
  )
  .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```
Or through the properties exposed by the action, which would allow to do so when defining the action, instead of doing it when executing it.
```c#
var checkEmailExist = new RxAction<String, bool>(checkEmail);

checkEmailExist.Elements
  .Subscribe(
    exists => {
      Console.WriteLine($"Email exist: {exist}");
    }
  )
  .DisposedBy(disposeBag);

checkEmailExist.Errors
  .Subscribe(
    errors => {
      Console.WriteLine($"Something went wrong: {error}");
    }
  )
  .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```

We can also use the `Executing` property to know when the action is being executed and show a loading indicator, for example.

```c#
checkEmailExist.Executing
  .Subscribe(isExecuting => {
    if (isExecuting) {
      showLoadingIndicator();
    } else {
      hideLoadingIndicator();
    }
  })
  .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```

An example for a `UIAction` created with the `RxActionFactory` would be something like this:

```c#
public UIAction Close { get; }
...
Close = rxActionFactory.FromAsync(close);
...
private Task close() => navigationService.Close(this, defaultResult);
```

A `UIAction` is a subclass of `RxAction` without inputs or outputs, meaning `RxAction<Unit, Unit>`

## Using it from the UI

We provide two subclasses to `RxAction` to make the most common uses more convenient, those are:

- `InputAction<TInput>` which is basically an `RxAction<TInput, Unit>`
- `UIAction` which is `RxAction<Unit, Unit>`

To bind the execution of one of these to a button tap we would do something like this

```c#
myButton.Rx().Tap()
    .Subscribe(myAction.Inputs)
    .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```

But better yet, we could use one of the `BindAction` extensions on UIButton.

```c#
myButton.Rx()
    .BindAction(myAction)
    .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```

This will also bing the enabled Observable back to the button. You can also specify the event that would trigger the action (tap by default). For example, for long press:

```c#
myButton.Rx()
    .BindAction(myAction, ButtonEventType.Longpress)
    .DisposedBy(disposeBag);
```

There's also a similar method for UIView and version for Android Views. It's recommended to write this extensions for other commonly used UI controls that are bound to an action and can be disabled.


## Testing

### Concatenating different executions of the same action

Sometimes we need to test how a single action can be executed multiple times in a row, this can't be done just by writing multiple `Execute` lines one after the other because the action is disabled while it's executing and this would cause an exception.

That's why we have this extension `ExecuteSequentally`:

```c#
ViewModel.SelectTag.ExecuteSequentally(selectedTags)
   .Subscribe()
```

where `selectedTags` in this case is an enumerable of all the different inputs we want to execute the action for.

In the case of `UIAction` that takes no imputs the parameter is replaced with an int for the number of times we want to execute the action.

```c#
ViewModel.EditStartTime.ExecuteSequentally(times: 2)
    .Subscribe()
```

### Concatenating different actions

Sometimes the above is not enough and we want to execute one action (once or multiple times) and then a different one on completion. That's when we use `PrependAction`:

```c#
ViewModel.SelectTag.ExecuteSequentally(selectedTags)
    .PrependAction(ViewModel.Save)
    .Subscribe()
```

This example will first execute `SelectTag` multiple times (once for every selectedTag) and then, when the last one completes it'll execute `Save`.

### Awaiting action execution

This is what was problematic before, we were returning an `Observable` from `Execute` but there was no real need to subscribe to that `Observable` for the action to start. That's why we were ignoring it, which resulted in some warnings during testing.

This is fixed now, `Execute` won't return anything and wether you use `Execute`, `ExecuteWithCompletion` or `ExecuteSequentally` you don't really need to await for the completion of the actions as long as you are using a `TestScheduler` because everything will happen immediately.

```c#
ViewModel.SelectTag.ExecuteSequentally(selectedTags)
    .PrependAction(ViewModel.Save)
    .Subscribe();

TestScheduler.Start();
```

### Common mistakes

When using `ExecuteWithCompletion` or  `ExecuteSequentally` with or without `PrependAction` don't forget to add a `Subscribe` at the end, otherwise the action will never start. This is not the case if you just use `Execute`.

If you try to observe the other properties from `RxAction`, like `Elements` or `Errors`, you have to be aware those *never complete*, even if the action does.
